Mayor: Look, I think he has a right to offer any example he wants. I think the larger issue here is that we know we have some work to do. This incident was a tragedy. There's obviously a full investigation going on. But as Commissioner Bratton said in the aftermath, you know, chokeholds have not been allowable under any normal circumstances within the NYPD for over 30 years. So, we have some work to do to make sure, through our new training efforts, and through our command structure, that we don't see the use of chokeholds. Now again, there may be some extraordinary life-and-death circumstance, but as a typical matter, it's not supposed to be a part of policing, and our job is to make sure it isn't.
Mayor: No.
Mayor: I think it's a very productive relationship. Again, they don't have to agree on everything. But, you can ask Reverend Sharpton, he'll be one of the people who'll tell you, from his own experience in Los Angeles, that Bill Bratton did something absolutely extraordinary and historic there in repairing substantially the relationship between police and community in a very, very troubled environment. One of the people who actually speaks most vehemently about how impressive that achievement is, is Al Sharpton. So, they'll disagree from time to time, but they have, I think, a respectful and positive relationship.
Mayor: Right.
Mayor: Well, I want to separate two pieces. On the question of a democracy and what people say in a democracy – I think we know the work that Reverend Sharpton's done over decades. I think what he's saying simply is, he expects to see some positive change. If he doesn't, he's going to use the democratic process to effect that change. That's fine. That doesn't worry me. I don't worry whether someone comes from one perspective or another perspective, from left or from right – it's the democratic process. I'm not afraid of anyone challenging me to do my job. I've set the standard for what we have to do in this city, repeatedly, and we're going to meet that standard.
On the question of the criticism, I happen to disagree with Reverend Sharpton on both those points. The training is quintessential to change. Now I can understand that if people hear the word training, they may think it's superficial or temporary. Bill Bratton doesn't do things in a small way, or an inconsequential way. Bill Bratton is the, I think, one of the greatest police reformers and architects of effective policing in the history of this country. He's saying we're going to systematically retrain the police department to make sure people understand how best to work with communities, and to be effective. And then that goes into the question of broken windows. I think in this city we need a better dialogue around what broken windows is and what it isn't. Broken windows, to me – I think I can say this also for Commissioner Bratton – is about addressing small things before they turn into big things, is about showing that there will be a consistent response to citizen complaints, because that's what generates a lot of police activity. Someone called 311 or 911, or went to the station house and said, here is a problem in my community, I'd like it to be addressed. And that conforms immediately to community policing, meaning we want any citizen who comes forward with a problem to know it's being taken seriously and being addressed. But Commissioner Bratton will also tell you that police officers have a wide range of options available to them, as he said yesterday. They can admonish, they can warn, they can give a summons, depending on the offense, they can arrest. Arrest is not the only option. And we want to create a dialogue where we solve a lot of problems up front, and proactively – that's broken windows to me. It is solving problems in a preventative, proactive fashion.
Mayor: I think the core philosophy is very sound, and again, I'd urge everyone to express it in its totality. Broken windows as a strategy, along with CompStat, is one of the reasons why, over the last 20 years, we became the safest big city in America. If someone says, are there specific things we want to constantly try and do better, are there trends we might want to address in a particular manner? Of course. We do that every day. The whole concept of CompStat is to look at what we're doing and try to do it better. So, within broken windows there's absolutely room to say, ‘Hey, this approach is working, maybe this approach we're going to try something different.’ Certainly within the retraining, you're going to see a lot of officers have new ideas, and I think better ideas, of how to approach situations. But the core philosophy I absolutely agree with.
